

     Owen Lunt was born 15 November 1892 in Colonia Pacheco, Chihuahua, Mexico. Owen’s parents were Henry Lunt and Sarah Ann Lunt. His father joined the church in England and emigrated to Utah. He moved to Cedar City and operated a hotel. Henry already had two wives when he married Sarah Ann Lunt on 16 January 1878. Soon after he began to experience pressure from the U. S. Marshals. To avoid prosecution for polygamy Henry took one of his wives to England where he served a mission. During this time Sarah took over the operation of the hotel and the stage stop. Upon his return home Henry was advised to move to Mexico to avoid further difficulty. This he was reluctant to do because he was nearly blind and the hotel was the sole source of support for his large family. After much consideration, Henry, his wife Sarah, and their children left Cedar City in November of 1887. It took them two years to reach Colonia Diaz in December of 1889. After purchasing supplies they continued to the mountain colony of Colonia Pacheco in January of 1890. The Lunt family engaged in farming, and ranching. They  bought a small cheese factory from George C. Naegle and Sarah’s cheese became famous.
     Owen was close to his mother. Sarah’s family was a happy family. There was always a goodnight kiss for her, and the boys were taught to pray night and morning and as well as participating in family prayer at night and kneeling about the table every morning.
     She was a remarkable woman, who took care of not only her own family but also her aged and blind husband as well as two of her husband’s wives, Aunt Ellen and Aunt Annie. She taught her boys to go without things themselves in order that their father and Ellen could have what they needed.
     Owens’s father died on 22 January 1902. He had been blind for several years and his wife Sarah, had begun a nine room brick home for the family. The Lunt family built a brick kiln and made brick for their new home. With the aid of a hired brick layer, and a carpenter they finished the home, a two-story affair. Unfortunately it was not finished before Henry’s death.
     The boys walked two miles to school. They were often needed to help on the farm in the fall to help with the harvest and in the spring to prepare the ground for planting. As a result school attendance was sporadic. The school in the Pacheco was not of high quality. There were insufficient funds to hire qualified teachers. Owen once said that the only qualification for a teacher was that she be a good girl. The last few years of grade school Owen was able to attend more regularly and he graduated in 1910. 
     During the year 1911-1912 Owen attended the Juarez Stake Academy in Colonia Juarez. His schooling was interrupted by the exodus from Mexico in the summer of 1912.
Owen came to the United States overland on horseback with the men. He arrived in El Paso in early August. His mother and sister-in-law, Chloe, were living at Tent City, a temporary shelter provided by the United States government for the refugees.
     It was difficult for the Mormons in El Paso to find employment and suitable housing. The Lunt family rented a flat on Dallas Street. Here an extended family of eight adults crowded into a three room apartment. They had little or no furniture besides beds and a crude table and chairs. They were hoping and thinking that conditions would settle down in Mexico and they would be able to return. 
     In 1915 Sarah and her youngest three sons returned to Mexico. Owen and his brothers, Alma and Clarence attended the Juarez Stake Academy for the year 1915-1916. After working with his brother Broughton as a carpenter, in the El Paso area in the summer of 1916 he returned to the Academy. It was during this time that he courted Velma Jackson.
     Owen and Velma Jackson were married in El Paso on the 7th of September 1917. They went on to Salt Lake City where they were sealed in the Salt Lake Temple on 13 September 1917. From there Velma went to stay with her parents in Ogden and Owen went into the service.
     Owen was inducted into the army on the 2nd of October 1917 at Hillsboro, New Mexico. His first training camp was at Fremont, Kansas. After his initial training he was sent to Camp Kearny near San Francisco. He had enlisted as a carpenter so was put to work building barracks. His wife, Velma, was soon able to join him because there was a job for a married woman to serve as a matron for the single girls who served there as telephone operators and secretaries.
     The war was soon over and Owen and Velma moved to Duncan, Arizona to join his brothers. With his saving and assistance from his brothers he was able to purchase a small farm.
      Owen was a good farmer. The farm was paid for and equipped in less than ten years. He managed to have his potatoes and roasting ears on the market earlier than the others and received a higher price for them.
     In the spring of 1921 Velma was expecting. She was excited about having a baby, especially since her sisters-in-law, who lived nearby, had children. Velma had experienced an earlier miscarriage and began to experience some complications. Her urine had high levels of albumin indicating malfunctioning kidneys.  She traveled to El Paso with her sister, Florence Payne, who was also expecting, to seek medical care One night after eating supper she experienced sharp pains and was taken to the hospital. An emergency caesarian operation was performed and the baby although about 5 weeks premature was soon breathing normally. Velma quickly lost consciousness and went into convulsions and died.
     A grief stricken husband and father came to El Paso and buried his wife. He was at a loss as to what to do with the child. The doctors said the baby must have mother’s milk. The day after Velma’s funeral, his sister-in-law, Florence Payne, overcome by the loss of her sister, delivered a baby boy two months premature. The child lived only a few hours. The problem of a nurse for the child was solved. Florence returned to her home in Virden to raise her sister’s child. It was close to the child’s father, Owen, as well.
     In the spring of 1923 George Q and Florence Payne decided to move to El Paso. By this time they had a son of their own, Joseph Devon. At this time, Owen was still single, so they took Owen’s child, Raynal, with them.


Mary Jane (Mae) Jones 


     Mary Jane Jones was born 12 December 1893 in Payson, Utah, the tenth child of Timothy Jones and Mary Jane Done. After her father married a second wife, the family moved to Mexico in November of 1896. Initially the family lived in Colonia Juarez, but moved to Colonia Dublan in April of 1897. 
     Timothy purchased a farm in Colonia Dublan and moved his family into a tent on the farm. The family was living in a tent when twin sons Ezra and Ezrel were born to Timothy and Mary Jane. A short time later the family moved into a new adobe house in Dublan.
     Mae and several of her siblings had smallpox and later typhoid fever. Mae’s mother contracted typhoid fever before the rest of the family. She had a close brush with death before her husband administered to her. When she appeared to be gone, Timothy said to her “Molly come back. Your work is not yet finished”. She recovered and had her last child a few months later.
     Mae’s missed a full year of school being because of her illness and her slow recovery from its effects. She had difficulty with arithmetic in the eighth grade and in desperation her mother had her brother Vern tutor her by coal oil lamp. She did so well in math afterwards that she was excused from taking a final in math at the end of the year. 
     Mae graduated from the eighth grade at age 16. She enrolled at the Juarez Stake Academy, which required her to live away from home. She and her sister Sarah kept house for her brothers and did all the cooking, washing and ironing. Mae attended the JSA for two years, which was interrupted by the Mexican Revolution and her family’s exodus from Mexico.
     After a short stay in El Paso the Jones family moved back to Payson, Utah. Here Mae enjoyed an active social life and finished high school at Payson High School, graduating in 1915. During 1915 her parents decided to move to Virden, New Mexico joining her brothers and sister and their families and others who had purchased the Gila Ranch and divided into individual farms.
     The Jones family arrived in Duncan, Arizona, on Christmas Eve of 1915, expecting to be met by their family but they didn’t arrive until the next day. When the train pulled into Duncan, the cowboys from the Lazy B Ranch came tearing across the bridge and slid to a stop at the train station. The Lazy B Ranch was a ranch owned by H. C. Day, grandfather of former Supreme Court Justice, Sandra Day O’Connor. 
     The Jones secured a ride to Virden where they stayed with the Mortensens. The following day John and Sarah Jones, Willard and Edna Jones, and June and Sarah Payne arrived from the Rio Grande. Initially the environment she found in Virden depressed Mae. She wandered the hills wondering if she had made a mistake coming with her parents instead of remaining in Payson. The contrast with Payson was extreme. A dance the second night they were in Virden illustrated this difference.
     The cowboys from the area danced in boots and spurs with cigarettes between their fingers. The Mormons had a difficult time controlling the rough cowboy element. One night at a dance at Franklin a drunken cowboy shot out the coal oil lamp leaving them in darkness.
     The Mormons in Virden formed their own orchestra so they could have control of their dances in their own community. Lucy Mortensen played the organ, June Payne the trombone, and Ralph Richardson the trumpet. The MIA officers posted rules for their dances. One night a group of drunken cowboys attempted to crash the dance. Hans Mortensen, the dance manager, stopped them with “Maybe you can run the flat (Franklin), but you can’t run the river.” They left.
     The first winter in Virden, Mae was very unhappy. She worked in Duncan at a dress shop. She also did housework at the Lazy B Ranch. 
     In the fall of 1917 Mae went to Colonia Dublan where her brother Albert (Chico) was married to Clela Call. Mae and her mother went to the wedding and Mae stayed to teach the first four grades that winter. She felt green and unprepared. Fortunately another teacher, Cecil Young helped her with her lesson plans and methods. She enjoyed the year in Dublan making new friends and enjoying the church and social environment.
     The following summer she attended New Mexico State Teachers College in Silver City. The following year she taught school in Virden. The following summer she went to Utah, attended BYU during the summer and taught school at Riverton. Her brother Lorin, after graduating from BYU had moved to Las Vegas, New Mexico, and encouraged her to attend New Mexico Normal University with her brother Leland. Mae enrolled at the University and graduated in May of 1922. 
     Mae resumed teaching in 1922-1923 in Virden. During this time she began to date Owen Lunt, whom she had met several years before in Colonia Pacheco. Owen’s first wife, Velma Jackson, had died in April of 1921. In the fall of 1923 Mae, her mother, and her two youngest brothers moved to Thatcher, Arizona where her brothers took advantage of the educational opportunities that were available in Thatcher. Mae continued her teaching career providing income for the family. Owen continued his courtship of Mae. He managed to travel to Thatcher where Mae had purchased a Ford car, which they used to drive to Virden for weekends and take in shows.
     Owen had urged Mae to marry him for some time, but she was unsure about her feelings. After making it a matter of prayer with Owen she resolved her doubts. On 18 May 1924 May was married at her mother’s home by her brother, Bishop Willard Jones. 
Owen had purchased a farm just east of the Arizona state line. Here they began their married life. 
     When Owen remarried in 1924 he sought to have Raynal returned to his him. Florence and George nearly consented but ultimately they decided to keep him. This decision was the source of considerable anguish for the adults involved. Owen, not wishing to take legal action, let the matter stand. He visited Raynal in El Paso and on occasion Raynal visited on the farm in Virden. 
     While he lived with the Paynes Raynal went by that name, but when he was called on a mission to Argentina, he took the name of Lunt. In his mission farewell he acknowledged to his relatives assembled that he was a Lunt and expressed his gratitude to his aunt and uncle in caring for him. Raynal later named a son David Payne Lunt to honor George and Florence who had been parents to him.
     Mae started married life as a stay at home mom. Home was a three-room frame house that was described as hot in the summer and cold in the winter. Their first child, Velma Mae, was born 2 February 1925. Daughters Mary and Vefa soon followed. 
     Owen loved to surprise his wife and family with gifts. Owen and Mae wanted a piano for their girls. He went to Morenci and purchased a piano from a family moving back to England. He also bought a Bell and Howell radio, which made it possible for him to listen to baseball games, in which he became so absorbed that he forgot to eat.    
      Owen and Mae took a trip to Mexico in the fall of 1929. The roads were terrible and as a result Mae suffered a miscarriage after they returned home. In Mexico they went to Colonia Pacheco where Owen was raised. Here they visited with his brothers Clarence and Alma and his sister Lavetta. 
     Owen Jones Lunt was born 11 September 1931. His birth made Owen and Mae conscious of the need for additional space. Owen and Mae made plans for a new house for their growing family. They moved the frame house to the northwest corner of the farm with the intent of building a new home on the original site. Mae’s brother, Vern, had drawn up plans for a new home. Owen went to El Paso with Orson Merrell to buy material for the new home. Owen was worried because his wife was expecting twins and had experienced some complications.
     A few days after returning from El Paso Owen became ill and died suddenly on 19 January 1934. His death was the result of acute nephritis or uremic poisoning. 
     Owen’s death was an emotional shock to his young widow who was in the last stages of a difficult pregnancy. Both Owen’s family and her own rallied around her at this time. Realizing that she would be unable to care for her family alone, Mae’s mother invited her to come and live with her. Here twin boys were born at her mother’s home on 28 February 1934. The twins were named Timothy Clarence and Henry Terrance, hereafter known as Tim and Terry.
     Mae’s mother realized that her home was too small for Mae’s family and suggested they build on to her home. Using the materials that Owen had purchased and the proceeds from his life insurance they were able to add two bedrooms and a bath to her mother’s home. 
     Mae continued to be a stay at home mom living on the income from the farm. When the twins started school she began substitute teaching. The teacher of the sixth and seventh grade quit and Mae was asked if she would take the job. She had never taught these grades so took the job with considerable trepadation. The following year she added the eighth grade and thus taught her son Owen for three consecutive years.
     Mae continued to teach the last three elementary grades until her twins were in her class, after which she requested a transfer to the lower elementary grades. Mae particularly liked the third and fourth grades. She was especially good at teaching the times tables and gave prizes to those who mastered them through the twelves.
     Mae’s mother died in May of 1945. Mae had some concern that the home she lived in would be divided between her siblings, however they signed over their interest to Mae. She became the sole owner of the home.
     All of Mae’s children finished high school in Virden. All of them attended college and four of them completed missions. Mae was attending summer school in Silver City in 1947 when her son Owen was critically burned in a weed burner accident. Owen’s recovery was slow and painful. Mae spent the summer of 1947 watching him in hospitals in Lordsburg and El Paso. He was able to come home in the fall and his sister Vefa stayed home from college to care for him. Owen’s indomitable spirit was able to overcome the physical and emotional trauma of this accident. Owen later took employment as a fire watch for the Forest Service to earn funds for his mission.   
     Mae continued to teach in Virden until 1956. She retired and sold her home and moved to Salt Lake City. She spent her retirement years traveling and visiting with her family. She died in Salt Lake City on 27 August 1978.
     Mae described her teaching style as strict but understanding. She had a lasting influence on school children in the community. Her legacy is the impact she had in teaching young minds and in moulding their character. 


     

     
